Nerdup is a small island about 10 to 15 minutes by boat from the Panama mainland.
Life on these islands is simple, though this one, in particular, is special.
Even though the island only has 24 inhabitants, seven of them,
along with five from other islands,
attend the only congregation of Jehovah's Witnesses in the region.
Bundetahada is one of them,
though until very recently she could neither read nor write.
I wanted to learn about the Bible,
even though I didn't know how to read.
My parents didn't send me to school,
but my brother taught me a little.
I felt that books spoke to people,
but to me, they were speechless.
My teacher even said that books could talk,
but I was never able to hear them.
When I saw people going to the Kingdom Hall, I thought,
these meetings look good, I should go too.
I knew that no one would say,
why are you here?
You won't understand anything.
That's why I started going to meetings,
and I've never stopped since.
Sometimes it's difficult,
but I know if I miss a meeting, I will feel bad.
So even if I can only listen, I still go.
Some people don't like to see you progressing.
They say,
boom, I think she's a man always with her books.
Even one of my brothers, who has since passed away,
used to tell me the same.
At first, I felt a shame reading in front of others,
and sometimes I still feel ashamed,
so I would wait until I was alone at night before I read.
But I did not always understand.
I needed someone to help me, to encourage me,
and explain what I was reading.
At first, there was only material in Spanish,
so that's all I had.
I don't speak Spanish,
so I didn't understand anything,
and nobody could explain to me in Guna what was written.
It was like a secret.
I really appreciate what I've learned about Jehovah.
If I didn't know about him, I would be like everyone else.
Studying the Bible has helped me to understand right from wrong.
When the videos are in Guna, I can understand them very well.
I love that the videos encourage Guna speakers to attend the meetings.
I have seen that preaching from door to door makes you happy.
When I think about it, I would like to be able to preach more freely like others do.
But we're very isolated here,
and it is hard to leave this island.
When I see pictures of the paradise, I want to be there.
I want to survive and live there.
In the future, the earth will be a paradise.
There is no doubt at all.
This motivates me to learn more.
I really wanted to reach my heart.
Thanks to the efforts of our brothers in translation offices,
even those with little or no education can grasp Bible truths and come to know God.
Jehovah's organization cares for us all.
Even the little ones, I want to be among those taught by Jehovah in this organization.
By the work they do, I can see that Jehovah cares even for me.